**Hikmat Abu Zayd** (`{{Langx|ar|حكمت أبو زيد}}`{=mediawiki}; pronounced
**Hekmat Abu Zeid** in [Egyptian Arabic](Egyptian_Arabic "wikilink");
1922 or 1923 -- 30 July 2011)`{{ref label|Birth|N|2}}`{=mediawiki}[^1]
was an Egyptian politician and academic. She became the first female
cabinet minister in Egypt in 1962.[^2] Her tenure as minister of social
affairs set a precedent. Afterwards, it became common for women to head
that ministry.[^3] An avowed advocate of
[Nasserism](Nasserism "wikilink"),[^4] Abu Zayd has had a major impact
on Egyptian law and policy in the areas of [social
affairs](Social_work "wikilink") and
[insurance](Social_insurance "wikilink").[^5]

## Early life and education {#early_life_and_education}

Born in the village of Shaykh Daud, located near the city of
[al-Qusiyya](Cusae "wikilink") in [Asyut
Governorate](Asyut_Governorate "wikilink"), Abu Zayd grew up in a
[nationalist](Egyptian_nationalism "wikilink") household. Her father\'s
job at the [Egyptian State
Railways](Egyptian_National_Railways "wikilink") meant that he was
assigned to many stations and was constantly on the move. Although her
mother was illiterate, Abu Zayd was encouraged to read and was given
access to her father\'s large library.[^6] Abu Zayd received an advanced
education. After completing her [secondary
education](secondary_education "wikilink") at the Helwan Girls School,
she obtained a [licence](Licentiate_(degree) "wikilink") in history from
[Cairo University](Cairo_University "wikilink") (then named Fuad I
University) in 1940. She progressed further in her academic studies by
receiving a teaching certificate in 1941, a [Master of
Arts](Master_of_Arts "wikilink") in education in 1950 from the
[University of St Andrews](University_of_St_Andrews "wikilink"), and
finally a [doctorate](doctorate "wikilink") in [educational
psychology](educational_psychology "wikilink") from the [University of
London](University_of_London "wikilink") in 1957. She taught in the
Women\'s College of [Ain Shams
University](Ain_Shams_University "wikilink") from 1955 to 1964, before
being promoted to the rank of [professor](Professor#Egypt "wikilink") at
Cairo University in 1965.[^7]

## Tenure as minister {#tenure_as_minister}

In 1962, Abu Zayd sat on the preparatory committee for the [National
Congress of Popular
Forces](National_Congress_of_Popular_Forces "wikilink"). During her
membership of the committee, she expressed her disagreement with
[President](President_of_Egypt "wikilink") [Gamal Abdel
Nasser](Gamal_Abdel_Nasser "wikilink") over some sections in the
[Charter of National Action](Charter_of_National_Action "wikilink").
Impressed, Nasser decided to appoint her as a minister.[^8] On 29
September 1962, Abu Zayd was named minister of social affairs in [Ali
Sabri](Ali_Sabri "wikilink")\'s first government.[^9] She retained her
role when the cabinet was reshuffled in March 1964,[^10] and served
until 1965.[^11]

![Hekmat Abu Zaid meeting German counterpart [Elisabeth
Schwarzhaupt](Elisabeth_Schwarzhaupt "wikilink") in Bonn, September
1963](Bundesarchiv_B_145_Bild-F016393-0020,_Bonn,_Schwarzhaupt_empfängt_Ministerin_aus_Ägypten.jpg "Hekmat Abu Zaid meeting German counterpart Elisabeth Schwarzhaupt in Bonn, September 1963"){width="200"}

Abu Zayd was part of a new female leadership that shared the same [lower
middle class](lower_middle_class "wikilink") background of Nasser and
his fellow [Free
Officers](Free_Officers_Movement_(Egypt) "wikilink").[^12] Her
appointment by Nasser was made in the context of his new socialist
program, which put emphasis on broadening access to education and
employment for all people, regardless of gender or social class.[^13]
The 1950s and especially the 1960s were a time of increased female
emancipation in Egypt.[^14] [Polygyny](Polygyny "wikilink") was on the
decline, and women were increasingly holding key posts in government,
industry and academia.[^15] The country\'s first two female
parliamentarians, [Rawya Ateya](Rawya_Ateya "wikilink") and [Amina
Shukri](Amina_Shukri "wikilink"), were elected in 1957.[^16] [Karimah
al-Sa\'id](Karimah_al-Sa'id "wikilink") became the deputy minister of
education in the 1960s. Such high-level appointments of a few
well-qualified women were showcased by the government, while the
majority of Egyptian women remained stuck in the lower echelons of
society.[^17] Nasser\'s appointment of Abu Zayd was a politically
significant move. Including a woman in the cabinet was a way for him to
co-opt female-run charitable organizations into the [Arab Socialist
Union](Arab_Socialist_Union_(Egypt) "wikilink") (ASU), the country\'s
newly formed [sole political party](One-party_state "wikilink").[^18]
Many of these associations were headed by women from prominent families
and were protective of their independence, which Nasser found
objectionable. His regime targeted women\'s organizations in the early
1960s and moved to take over most of their functions as state
responsibilities, thereby depriving the associations of their momentum
and autonomy. Abu Zayd implemented these policies, which were aimed at
benefiting female workers and peasants.[^19] The Ministry of Social
Affairs which she headed was increasingly specializing in women\'s
issues.[^20] In 1963, it organized a general and wide-ranging women\'s
conference to discuss, among other things, ways to increase female
economic [productivity](productivity "wikilink"), working women\'s
leading role in spreading [family planning](family_planning "wikilink"),
as well as the rise of family income through the employment of female
members. Abu Zayd was named to preside over the conference, thereby
cementing her status as leader of the [women\'s movement in
Egypt](Feminism_in_Egypt "wikilink").[^21] She became coordinator for
women\'s activities within the Arab Socialist Union in 1963,[^22] at a
time when the party had nearly 250,000 female members.[^23]

During her time in office, Abu Zayd worked on several different social
issues. She strongly supported a law that prohibited [Islamic oral
repudiation](Divorce_(Islamic) "wikilink") and made it mandatory for a
husband to go to court to be able to divorce his wife.[^24] In order to
combat [mendicity](Begging "wikilink"), she imposed prison terms on
recidivist beggars who returned to begging after they had received
state-sponsored training in handicrafts.[^25] In addition to registering
[NGOs](Non-governmental_organization "wikilink") and expanding their
development activities, she launched projects aimed at improving the
status of rural women.[^26] One of the most sensitive tasks assigned to
Abu Zayd was the relocation of thousands of
[Nubians](Nubian_people "wikilink"), displaced by the construction of
the [Aswan Dam](Aswan_Dam "wikilink"), to newly built villages. Her
management of the resettlement process led to her being
[nicknamed](nickname "wikilink") the \"Merciful Heart of the
Revolution\" by Nasser.[^27] Nevertheless, the Nubians\' [forced
displacement](Development-induced_displacement "wikilink") remains
controversial in Egypt to this day, with some blaming Nasser for the
neglectful conditions in which the relocated Nubians have been living
since then.[^28]

On a personal level, Abu Zayd faced domestic problems during her tenure
as minister. Her husband was resentful of her responsibility-laden role
and of the amount of time she spent outside the house. Their previously
modest lifestyle changed considerably as she hired a 12-year-old
[houseboy](houseboy "wikilink") and was provided a [chauffeur-driven
car](Take-home_vehicle "wikilink") by the government.[^29]

## Exile in Libya {#exile_in_libya}

Following Nasser\'s death in 1970 and [Anwar
Sadat](Anwar_Sadat "wikilink")\'s ascension to the presidency, Abu
Zayd\'s career progression was blocked. She moved to
[Libya](Libya "wikilink") with her husband in 1974.[^30] Her Nasserist
convictions were in line with the
[anti-colonialism](Anti-imperialism "wikilink"),
[anti-Zionism](anti-Zionism "wikilink") and
[pan-Arabism](pan-Arabism "wikilink") of Libya\'s leader [Muammar
Gaddafi](Muammar_Gaddafi "wikilink").[^31] Abu Zayd spent nearly two
decades in Libya, during which time she taught [political
science](political_science "wikilink") at [Al Fateh
University](Al_Fateh_University "wikilink") in
[Tripoli](Tripoli,_Libya "wikilink").[^32] She also penned articles and
made speeches denouncing the Egyptian government.[^33]

Abu Zayd began criticizing President Sadat in the mid-1970s. She became
a leader of the [Egyptian National
Front](Egyptian_National_Front "wikilink"), which was set up in
[Damascus](Damascus "wikilink") in 1980 by General [Saad El
Shazly](Saad_El_Shazly "wikilink"). The organization called for the
overthrow of Sadat\'s government.[^34] Due to her opposition to Sadat\'s
peace overture to [Israel](Israel "wikilink"), Abu Zayd was accused of
[high treason](high_treason "wikilink"),
[terrorism](terrorism "wikilink") and [spying](spying "wikilink"), and
was consequently deprived of her Egyptian nationality.[^35] This turned
her into a [stateless](Statelessness "wikilink") political
[refugee](refugee "wikilink").[^36] A long legal battle ensued, which
was finally resolved in late 1991 when a judge ruled that Abu Zayd and
her husband were entitled to their [Egyptian
passports](Egyptian_passport "wikilink").[^37] She was also acquitted of
the charges of high treason and terrorism.[^38][^39]

## Later years and death {#later_years_and_death}

After having recovered their nationality, Abu Zayd and her husband came
back to Egypt in March 1992.[^40] She was treated as a
[VIP](Very_Important_Person "wikilink") upon her return, and rushed to
visit Nasser\'s [mausoleum](mausoleum "wikilink").[^41] During the
1990s, she opposed the [Gulf War](Gulf_War "wikilink"), the [Madrid
Peace Conference](Madrid_Conference_of_1991 "wikilink"), as well as
Zionism and [American imperialism](American_imperialism "wikilink"). She
wrote articles for *[al-Osboa](al-Osboa "wikilink")* newspaper in 1998
dealing with the issues of Western imperialism and Arab unity.[^42] In
late 2010, she was hospitalized at the Anglo-American Hospital in Cairo
to receive treatment for her [bone
fractures](bone_fracture "wikilink").[^43] [Farkhonda
Hassan](Farkhonda_Hassan "wikilink") visited her there on behalf of then
First Lady [Suzanne Mubarak](Suzanne_Mubarak "wikilink").[^44] During
her stay at the hospital, Abu Zayd granted an interview to *[Almasry
Alyoum](Almasry_Alyoum "wikilink")* newspaper in which she defended
Nasser\'s legacy and lamented the loss of tolerance in Egypt.[^45]

Abu Zayd died in Cairo on 30 July 2011.[^46]

## Awards

Abu Zayd received the [Lenin Peace Prize](Lenin_Peace_Prize "wikilink")
in December 1970.[^47]

